Have InstrumentationScope use normative language (#4488)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/common/instrumentation-scope.md

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: Instrumentation Scope
--->

# Instrumentation Scope

**Status**: [Stable](../document-status.md)

A logical unit of the application or one if its components, with which the emitted telemetry can be
associated. It is typically the developer's choice to decide what denotes a
reasonable instrumentation scope. The most common approach is to use the
[instrumentation library](../glossary.md#instrumentation-library) as the scope,
however other scopes are also common, e.g. a module, a package, a class or
a plugin name can be chosen as the instrumentation scope.

The instrumentation scope is defined by the
(name,version,schema_url,attributes) tuple where version, schema_url, and
attributes are optional. This tuple MUST uniquely identify the logical unit of the

> code that emits the telemetry. A typical approach to ensure uniqueness is to

Reviewer: I think it would be good to replace "code" by "application" here as well, especially since this is a normative sentence.

Reviewer 2: Given we support applications, libraries, services, etc. I'd argue `code` may be a better generic than `application`.  Given some other comments, we maybe want this to be a more "runtime" word, e.g. module, instance, etc.  Yes it can be a library when you expect only one instance of the library, but the collector plans to use Scope to denote different instances of the same instrumentation.

Author: We changed that recently from `code` to `application` and this very section slipped. So either we use the same here (`unit of the application or one of its components`) or some other alternative. No personal preference though.

Reviewer: If "application" is too "user-oriented" (as opposed to libraries or services) and "code" is too "build-time", what about "software"?

use the fully qualified name of the emitting code (e.g. fully qualified library
name or fully qualified class name).

The instrumentation scope MUST be used to obtain a
[Tracer, Meter, or Logger](../glossary.md#tracer-name--meter-name--logger-name).

> The instrumentation scope's optional Schema URL identifies the [Telemetry

Reviewer 2: Does this need normative language?

Schema](../schemas/README.md) that the instrumentation's emitted
telemetry conforms to.

> The instrumentation scope's optional attributes provide additional information about

Reviewer 3: Do we need to state what kinds of attributes are allowed here (i.e. same kinds of attributes as the resource attributes AIUI)

Author: So currently we leave this to the discretion of users/authors. I think we should provide some guidelines and/or more examples, but I'd suggest discussing that in a follow up.

> the scope. For example for a scope that specifies an

Reviewer 2: Think in the collector's case, isn't the instrumentation scope the *instance* of a module vs. the module itself?

Author: The last example should mention this, i.e. 

> Internal application components emitting their own telemetry, relying on
  `InstrumentationScope` attributes to differentiate themselves

instrumentation library an additional attribute may be recorded to denote the URL of the
repository URL the library's source code is stored.

## Examples

Here is a non comprehensive list of usage scenarios:

* Generic instrumented library with its name, version and attributes containing
  additional library information.

> * Database access instrumented with its own name and version (e.g. `db.system.name`).

Reviewer 2: This is another example. If I instrument JDBC, would the instrumentation scope have the db system name?

Author: Updated the example to mention JDBC and SQLAlchemy as concrete examples.

Reviewer 4: This is a span level attribute: https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/database/database-spans.md#span-definition

I am not sure if this is a good example (or maybe I simply do not understand it).

We could add "log bridge" example: https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/issues/1550

* Client consuming or producing information, using its name, version and `id` to set
  `InstrumentationScope`.

> * Set a meter `short-name` in `InstrumentationScope` attributes, to be used as metric

Reviewer 2: I think given instrumentation scope has become identifying, we may need more changes here.  Tracking bug: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/4223

Reviewer: I'm not sure I fully understand the link between this sentence and #4223, but it sounds like the issue is that this `short-name` use case may become deprecated as a consequence of scope attributes being identifying.

Since this is just a non-exhaustive list of examples, instead of blocking the PR, what about just removing this example, and adding it back later if necessary once #4223 is resolved?

Author: Removed this example for now.

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: Instrumentation Scope
--->

# Instrumentation Scope

**Status**: [Stable](../document-status.md)

A logical unit of the application or one if its components, with which the emitted telemetry can be

> associated. It is typically the developer's choice to decide what denotes a

Reviewer 4: Is not a **type/value that identifies and represents** a logical unit of the application or one if its components?

Reviewer 4: First

reasonable instrumentation scope. The most common approach is to use the
[instrumentation library](../glossary.md#instrumentation-library) as the scope,
however other scopes are also common, e.g. a module, a package, a class or

> a plugin name can be chosen as the instrumentation scope.

Reviewer 4: This  is not precise. I think we should say instrumentation library information/metadata (name, version, semconv scheme URL) is commonly used as an instrumentation scope. The instrumentation library itself is not an instrumentation scope.

Reviewer 5: Is there an important distinction here? A library is a scope, the library's name, version, etc become the scope's name, version, etc.

Reviewer 4: The scope can represent the library. The library itself is not a scope. Not sure if this would be a good analogy but a chapter title is not the whole chapter. 

I think that the current way it is described is obvious for people already knowing what instrumentation scope is. However. It may be challenging for people who need to learn what this abstraction is about.

From ChatGPT:

> In **OpenTelemetry**, an **Instrumentation Scope** refers to the *context in which telemetry data (like traces, metrics, or logs) is generated*. It describes **which library or component** produced the data and typically includes:

1. **Name** – the name of the instrumentation library (e.g., `"io.opentelemetry.contrib.mongodb"` or `"my-custom-logger"`).
2. **Version** – the version of that library (e.g., `"1.28.0"`).
3. **Schema URL** *(optional)* – a URL pointing to the schema that defines the structure of emitted telemetry data.

This metadata is attached to telemetry data to help consumers (e.g., backends, dashboards, or exporters) **interpret, group, or filter** data based on its source.

For example, in OTLP (OpenTelemetry Protocol), the instrumentation scope appears in traces and metrics data structures, letting you trace back emitted telemetry to the library responsible.

Author: @pellared Updated the wording. Let me know what you think, i.e.

> The most common approach is to use
the name and version of the [instrumentation library](../glossary.md#instrumentation-library),
with any additional identifying information as part of the scope's attributes.
Other software components can be used too to get name, version and additional attributes, e.g.
e.g. a module, a package, a class or a plugin.

Reviewer 4: I find it a lot better. Thanks

The instrumentation scope is defined by the

> (name,version,schema_url,attributes) tuple where version, schema_url, and

Reviewer 4: Shouldn't we define what name, version, schema_url, attributes are?

Author: Name and version are implicitly defined (see other paragraphs) while schema and attributes have each their own paragraph.

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: Instrumentation Scope
--->

# Instrumentation Scope

**Status**: [Stable](../document-status.md)

> A logical unit of software, with which the emitted telemetry can be

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
A logical unit of software with which the emitted telemetry can be
```

associated. It is typically the developer's choice to decide what denotes a
reasonable instrumentation scope. The most common approach is to use
the name and version of the [instrumentation library](../glossary.md#instrumentation-library),
with any additional identifying information as part of the scope's attributes.

> Other software components can be used too to get name, version and additional attributes, e.g.
> e.g. a module, a package, a class or a plugin.

Reviewer: Small typo:
```suggestion
Other software components can be used too to get name, version and additional attributes, e.g.
a module, a package, a class or a plugin.
```

The instrumentation scope is defined by the
(name,version,schema_url,attributes) tuple where version, schema_url, and

> attributes are optional. This tuple MUST uniquely identify the logical unit of

Reviewer 7: Many OTel implementation do not support scope attributes yet as an identifying part. Adding this restriction to the specification will make implementations that are currently otherwise compliant non-compliant. This seems by definition not backwards compatible.

Author: Good point. I have relaxed this to a SHOULD, so this doesn't break implementations that don't do this yet.

software that emits the telemetry. A typical approach to ensure uniqueness is to
use the fully qualified name of the emitting software unit (e.g. fully qualified library
name or fully qualified class name).

> The instrumentation scope MUST be used to obtain a
> [Tracer, Meter, or Logger](../glossary.md#tracer-name--meter-name--logger-name).

Reviewer 7: The instrumentation scope is not used to obtain a Tracer/Meter/Logger. It defines the parameters of the Tracer/Meter/Logger that is obtained from a provider.

```suggestion
The instrumentation scope is used to obtain a
[Tracer, Meter, or Logger](../glossary.md#tracer-name--meter-name--logger-name).
```

> The instrumentation scope's name MUST be specified to identify the `InstrumentationScope`

Reviewer 7: How is this requirement enforced? Where is this restriction implemented?

This paragraph contains self-contradiction. If a name is required to be specified, it, by definition, cannot also be the case that it is unspecified and left as an empty string.

Reviewer 7: It doesn't seem like we can make a hard requirement here. There is no creation mechanism that can enforce this. It is just defining the fields of the type.

We also [make recommendations](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/b0f8078bedb34fcdc3465a1f0df5478c7387c7bb/specification/trace/api.md?plain=1#L116-L133) in part of the specification that state this name should be set to an empty string.

I seems to follow that the semantic content of the instrumentation scope types need to be left to specification defining its use.

Author: @MrAlias This looks good?

name. It SHOULD be set to the empty string as last fallback.

> The instrumentation scope's optional Schema URL MUST identify the [Telemetry

Reviewer 7: How is this requirement implemented? Are implementations required to have constructors for instrumentation scope that validate this restriction?

This seems invalid and will make many already stable implementations non-complaint with this specification.

Author: Likewise, used SHOULD instead to allow for flexibility and prevent breaking existing implementations.

Schema](../schemas/README.md) that the instrumentation's emitted
telemetry conforms to.

The instrumentation scope's optional attributes provide additional information about
the scope. For example for a scope that specifies an
instrumentation library an additional attribute may be recorded to denote the URL of the
repository URL the library's source code is stored.

## Examples

Here is a non comprehensive list of usage scenarios:

> * Generic instrumented library with its name, version and attributes containing

Reviewer 4: Should it not be?

```suggestion
* Generic instrumentation library with its name, version and attributes containing
```

Author: Technically it could be either one. But let's go with `instrumentation` to stay uniform with the typical case mentioned in the first paragraph.
